How I got my design:

I had to try to portray both the population of homeless being sheltered and how it relates to the resultant cost to the population of people being from out-of-state. In addition I was also trying to show the rising costs of housing the homeless. So, for my first draft I chose a line graph to show how the total budget spending by the Department of Homeless Services has risen over the years, and compare that with the budget kept for Project Reconnect. In addition, a separate chart was to show the rising homeless population. That plan ran aground of three problems. One was that it was a design challenge – since the DHS budget went into hundreds of millions, while the Project Reconnect budget presumably was in the thousands. So when a line graph was drawn, no amount of tweaking the ticks could make the Project Reconnect data point seem prominent. It was completely merging into the horizontal axis. The second problem, was being unable to be convinced by my sources that the figure we selected as the budget for Project Reconnect was indeed for the program, since it went by many names. Then I decided to take only the per head cost of sheltering a homeless person, versus the average price of a ticket. That too was difficult for two reasons, one being that the ratio still remained so large that the datapoint of the average ticket price could not be distinguished separate from the horizontal axis. Secondly, the average cost per head of sheltering a homeless differed according to whether they lived as a family, or were single adults, with the former being more. There was no way to collate the two and come to a figure. So instead of comparing the cost of sheltering the homeless versus sending them back home, I decided to weight it against how much the DHS would have to pay following the implementation of Project Reconnect. That is the graph would now show how much the DHS spent in reality, and compare that to how much they would have paid had they maximized the potential of Reconnect. That left the second chart showing the population factor – undoubtedly it was tied up to the chart since it decided how much was being saved or spent. I chose to incorporate it into the chart by making it an annotation that popped up on click. I had a lot of data points spanning months beginning 2011 so I chose a bubble chart, where each bubble would act as a click-able data point.

The problem that arose then is that because of data-points existing simultaneously, the click and hover functions were not as responsive as I hoped – not to mention cluttered. So I converted into a column chart where the datapoints would be more clearly defined. The question that arose then was, does the viewer really need to know how much the DHS spent in June of 2011? Can the visualization convey the same story without going in so deep into the statistics? So I decided to use yearly data-points. The problem that arose then was that 2015 is still not over – so compared to the other years, the bar has incomplete data. So I collapsed all the years again to simply show how much the city spent to house each of its different categories of homeless from 2011 till now. The population factor was depicted using the tooltip option, while the annotation pointed out exactly how much less the city could have saved.

How I got my data:

The city categorizes its homeless population in three categories: families with minors, families without minors, and single adults. I needed to find out how much the city spent in housing these three categories. a) I knew how much the city spent on housing a single adult. b) I knew how much the city spent on housing a single family. c) I had the total number of individuals in each. It was easy to find the total amount of money spent to house single adults – I simply multiplied the population with the per head cost. Calculating the cost of housing the families was harder – since I had the total number of individuals in that category, and the per family cost, as opposed to the per head cost. So I divided the cost by the average family size of USA to arrive to a per head figure. Then I multiplied accordingly to find the total amount of money spent to house families.

Next I had to find out how the costs would have decreased following the implementation of Project Reconnect. I knew that 10 percent of families with children and 20 percent of adults come from other states. So I subtracted 10 and 20 percent from the respective categories.
