One of the first things I found out during reporting was that the process of applying for a one-way ticket is relatively straight-forward. I wasn't expecting this initially, as usually bureaucratic processes take a lot of time, there's a lot of forms to fill out, and many hoops to jump through. So when I learnt that the process only takes a few days to complete, and then people are sent to whereever they choose to go, my visualization changed its shape. From the start, it was always going to be a process flowchart visualization instead of a barchart or piechart, because I was trying to convey the steps to the reader, however initially, the first draft version was more like a journey, and had a winding path. By the second draft, after I had interviewed sources and learnt the exact process, the visualization became very linear, because although at the beginning there was very little written about the process, and the process seemed to be confusing (i.e. how do people prove they have a place to stay? How do they hear about it?) and there isn't any official documentation of the steps, it quickly became clear that it was a fairly simple program. 

When I did my first draft, I didn't taken into consideration too much the color scheme, or the style of the Upshot, so I just designed it however I wished. But quickly, it became evident that the visualization didn't belong in the Upshot, so I simplified everything to make it cleaner, using the colors of the Upshot, and setting it against a white background, as opposed to the initial dark blue. 