Zhihao Zhang
4/7/2015
First Draft

Project Reconnect: Act of Compassion or Bum-banishing?

Homelessness has been a source of vexation for New York’s government officials and citizens alike. The homeless population in N.Y.C swells to record high of more than 67,000 people. Including 25,000 children, according to data from the 2014 Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress. In a city of 8.4 million people, this means that one in every 125 New Yorkers is currently sleeping in overpopulated shelters or on the street, under the cold limelight. 
Although there are many services dedicated to helping the unfortunates, the effects and efforts are far from satisfaction. However, there has been an assist program that saves money and reunites families, but it is often criticized as shortsighted and controversial: shipping homeless out of N.Y.C with one-way tickets. 
Project Reconnect, a city operated assist program under the Department of Homeless Service (DHS), provides one-way travel assistance to homeless by train, bus or air if the applicants have a strong connection to a location outside of NYC, a viable, identified place to live, and means of support through employment or by family member, according to the program’s official brochure. 
The decision is voluntary and the government will subsidize trips from the Carolinas to Caribbeans, some even to Europe. DHS’s spokesman Christopher Miller told the New York Post that the program is a “compassionate solution” in which homeless New Yorkers can reunite with their loved ones and find other stable housing and employment options outside of city’s competitive environment. 
Some speculators believe otherwise. 
Interview with speaker from the Coalition of Homelessness and Partnership with the Homelessness in near future, who have been strongly against the program in other interviews. 
Project Reconnect has existed in other forms of homeless relocation programs for decades, some more conspicuous than others. In 1987, Ed Koch proposed buying the Gibber Hotel near Kiamesha Lake, N.Y. to house homeless families. Around 600 people would live and work in that hotel, which was two-hour drive from Manhattan, according New York Times record. Koch’s proposal did not succeed due to strong local oppositions from Sullivan County, where the hotel is located. Nevertheless, this was one of the early examples of relocating homeless out of the city. 
Mayor Rudolph W. Guiliani took a more severe stance towards homeless. “Streets do not exist in civilized societies for the purpose of people sleeping there,” the mayor said during a radio call-in show in 1999. A fury of policies cracking down on homelessness shortly followed, such as requiring employment in exchange for shelter and sweeping public space arresting homeless loiters or trespassers, according to TIMEs achieve
Interview with Dr. Lance Freeman, expert on homeless policy from Columbia University.
In 2007, Mayor Michael Bloomberg introduced Project Reconnect by sending 550 families to Paris, Orlando, Puerto Rico etc. The average transportation cost was around $270 each, less than the cost to shelter them, which is about $75 per day per person, according to New York Times archive (*will find the primary source for this). 
Critics of the program said it was reckless and senseless because moving homeless people out of state did not solve homelessness: It simply moved people into a different jurisdiction, Scott Cotenoff, senior vice- president at the Partnership for the Homeless told the New York Times.  
Despite opposition from social groups, Project Reconnect and its equivalent programs have been operating across U.S. cities.  In 2009, more than a dozen homeless left Lancaster, California through the Opportunity Bus Pass Program. Its former mayor R. Rex Parris even contributed $10,000 to the bus program. 
In Detroit, the Homeward Bound program, in collaboration with Travelers Aid Society of Metropolitan Detroit, Wayne Metro, and other human service agencies, provide assistance for housing placement, transitional housing, motel vouchers, and household needs, according to its official website. The Interstate Compact, funded by the State of Michigan Department of Human services and in collaboration with Travelers Aid, has helped over 250 runaway youths to their state of origin. 
The Homeward Bound program also has operation in San Francisco. Apart from family or friend support at destinations, the applicants also have to prove to be medically stable to travel unassisted and abstain from alcohol or using other substance, before they get their bus ticket from the Human Services Agency, according to the program’s official website. Personal hygiene also has to be at an acceptable level to travel. Shower and clothing facilities are provided before getting on the bus. Oh, and no pets, except for certified service animals. 
Two new cities recently joined the homeless relocation momentum.  In June 2013, the Metro Council of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, has approved a measure to bus homeless out of its city. In the budget document, the program is called Homeless Outreach Prevention Efforts (HOPE). The initial budget for the program was around $5000. With average bus ticket around $150 per person, roughly 30 out of the city’s estimated 800 homeless would get the ticket, according to the Advocate. Given Baton Rouge’s small city size (80 square miles, Brooklyn: 96 square miles), it is reasonable to practice the program on a smaller scale. However, the state of Hawaii is going big with its relocation program. 
Estimated 17,000 homeless in the state, Hawaii plants to devote $100,000 in the “Return to Home” program starting 2013 to fund airplanes and cruise ships for anyone who meets the requirements, according to Honolulu Civil Beats. The Department of Human Services is responsible for screening the candidates and providing the tickets. Apart from being mentally healthy, clean, and support at destination, applicants must act voluntarily and only allowed to use the service once. 
Bum-banishment or act of compassion, homeless relocation programs such as Project Reconnect will stay relevant and controversial. 
